Kai Rowlands

Mandelbrot Set

This program contains one file: "mandelbrot.cpp" and allows you to view the Mandelbrot set, a famous fractal in the branch of mathematics called complex analysis. To begin, compile the code with the following command: "g++ mandelbrot.cpp -o mandelbrot", then execute it with the following command: "./mandelbrot". Once you have done this the program will run on its own and you will be able to view the Mandelbrot set in the terminal. Note: within mandelbrot.cpp I have set the height to 55 and the width to 110. However, I chose these values because they fit the screen on my computer the best. I encourage you to modify these values and test what size fits best on your screen, so long as the width is twice as large as the height, otherwise the output image will become stretched.

The Mandelbrot set is defined by the relatively simple function, f(z) = z^2 + c, where c is a complex number. To obtain the Mandelbrot set we check to see if a point, c, diverges or does not diverge in the complex plane when iterated starting at z = 0. For example, let's check to see if the point c = 1 + 0i is an element of the Mandelbrot set. So our function becomes f(z) = z^2 + 1. To begin, we let z = 0. So f(0) = 1. Next, we let z be the value we obtained from the previous iteration, in this case z = 1. So f(1) = 2. Then f(2) = 5, f(5) = 26, so on so forth. We then repeat this process over and over again. So when c = 1 + 0i our sequence becomes 1, 2, 5, 26, .... From this can see that c gets infinitely larger as we increase the amount of iterations, thus it diverges and is not an element of the Mandelbrot set. This explanation only involved when c lies along the real axis, however, we can do this process for any point in the complex plane. For instance, we can use our algorithm to check if the point c = -1 + i. However, when c is a two-dimensional vector using our algorithm becomes increasingly more difficult. In fact, points in the complex plane are defined by z = a + bi, where a and b are real numbers. This makes using our algorithm even more complicated. For instance, suppose we wish to determine whether or not the point c = 0.0374 + 0.1732i is an element of the Mandelbrot set. This would be a very time consuming process. Because of this viewing the Mandelbrot set is almost exclusively done using computer software.

As mentioned above, the Mandelbrot set is fractal and is infinitely complex. This is not surprising since there are an infinite amount of numbers in the complex plane. Understanding this can help us begin to understand what the Mandelbrot set is most famous for: its zoom sequence, which you can view on YouTube. Since there are an infinite amount of real numbers we have an infinite amount of values of c to check, and sometimes those values may appear to diverge but in fact do not and some do diverge but take a long time to do so. When viewing the Mandelbrot set using a more sophisticated program, points are marked with different colors, these different colors denote how quickly that point diverges. But what is most interesting about the Mandelbrot set is when you zoom into the boundary of the set it reveals very intricate and complex patterns as the pattern even begins to repeat itself.
